

=== PAGE 1 ===
Page 
1


=== PAGE 2 ===
Page 
2
International Journal of  
Metaverse (IJM) 
A Web-Based Rental House Smart Finder using Rapid Application 
Development basis for Evaluation of  ISO 205010
Avegail L. Monteverde1, Joshua James S. Maderazo1,  Keyleen Christine M. Cruz1, NIcko A. Magnaye1*
Volume 1 Issue 1, Year 2023
ISSN: 2837-2417 (Online)
DOI: https://doi.org/10.54536/ijm.v1i1.1464
https://journals.e-palli.com/home/index.php/ijm
Article Information ABSTRACT
Received: March 22, 2023
Accepted: April 03, 2023
Published: April 05, 2023
Businesses including the promotion of  rental properties, utilized the advantage of  using 
technologies to attract more clients. Most of  them use a website to easily advertised their 
properties online. Hence, there were lots of  existing system developed to find hotels and 
apartments online, without considering other affordable rental houses, such as boarding 
houses and bed spacers. Aside from that, people in Bansud and Bongabong Oriental 
Mindoro, can’t easily find a rental house with the reason of  lack of  details regarding the 
location of  each rental house and couldn’t find an affordable rental house immediately.  
From that, A Web-Based Rental House Smart Finder using Rapid Application Development 
basis for Evaluation of  ISO 205010 was developed to assist the clients in finding affordable 
variations of  rental houses such as boarding house, dormitories, hotels and others. The 
system can also provide necessary information of  specific rental house properties and even 
gave an alternative option by providing near rental property listings using kilometer distance. 
The system can also accept reservation request from the clients. On the other hand, the 
Rapid Application Development was used in building the project for quick continuous 
development and testing during the project’s software development lifecycle. The RAD 
strategy allows to investigate a working model as in front of  schedule as could be normal 
considering the present situation if  the frameworks meet the necessities required, and 
propose imperative changes. The ISO/IEC 25010 software quality standards were applied 
in the evaluation to determine the functional suitability, performance efficiency, usability, 
reliability, security, maintainability and portability of  the system. The overall mean of  the 
ISO/IEC 25010 evaluation result was 3.67, which was regarded as very effective, indicating 
that the evaluators were satisfied by giving positive feedback. Some of  the evaluators 
suggested to have a mobile application for accessibility.  
Keywords
Smart Finder, Rental, Rental 
House, Rad, Iso/Iec 25010
INTRODUCTION
The number of  entrepreneurs has grown tremendously in 
recent years (Acs et al., 2018). The competition platform 
has also changed from traditional-based to digital-based, 
through utilization of  modern technological facilities to 
capture a bigger market share (Koe & Sakir, 2020). In 
the high growth of  internet users, e-comme commerce 
seems to be a promising business opportunity as it offers 
convenience in which client can access the information 
they need anytime and anywhere and even gave businesses 
an opportunity to represent themselves in ways they want 
to be seen. As the number of  internet users continues 
to rise, e-commerce businesses have more opportunities 
for growth. With that, to reach people around the globe, 
industries such as hotels, apartments, dormitories, rental 
houses, and rooms for rent utilize the advantage of  using 
technologies. However, individuals require a place to stay 
at all times, from businesses who travel from one area to 
another in the course of  their company to students who 
study away from home (Santos, 2018). Clients looking 
for temporary place for settlement rapidly growing. Due 
to that, the strong demand for accommodation facilities 
on the back of  tourism growth in the Philippines has 
grown, in which the hospitality industry’s capacity is 
seen lacking to host both the foreign and local visitors as 
stated by (Abad, 2017). There is also a lack of  on-campus 
accommodation in most college areas, forcing students 
to find an apartment outside near the school (Maughan, 
2016). People may have to spend time as feasible with 
their own sightseeing to know something about the rental 
house closest to the institution where they wish to live. 
When it comes to choosing a dormitory or boarding 
house for university students in the Philippines, location 
and price are the two most important factors (Curaza, 
2021) which is also a difficult factor considered in finding 
rental house in Bansud and Bongabong according to 
the local survey conducted. People in the target area 
can’t easily find a rental house with the reason of  lack 
of  details regarding the location of  each rental house 
and couldn’t find an affordable rental house immediately. 
From that, finding rental houses is considered as 
challenging task to do especially when a certain client 
doesn’t know more about a specific place. Aside from 
that, prices and amenities of  the rental houses is bearing 
also for the clients to consider wherein a system would 
fulfill their necessities. Furthermore, according to the 
homeowners based on the prior survey, an online site 
must be needed to promote their rental houses to gain 
much profits since the other websites only focused on 
hotels. Due to that, a Web-Based Rental House Smart 
Finder using Rapid Application Development basis 
for Evaluation of  ISO 205010  has been developed to 
1 Mindoro State University, Philippines
* Corresponding author’s e-mail: nickomagnaye15@gmail.com

=== PAGE 3 ===
Page 
3
https://journals.e-palli.com/home/index.php/ijm
. Int. J. Metaverse 1(1) 01-04, 2023
simplify the process of  searching rental houses for clients 
as well as advertising rental properties of  the landlords 
to attract a wider range of  prospective tenants with a 
faster response time in between landlord and the client 
(Payusan et al., 2016). In addition, the system also utilized 
Google Map. Incorporating maps are also convenient to 
know the specific location and commonly used by the 
user in transportation to save time and money (Ramos 
et al., 2018). Important information of  the rental house 
owners including contact numbers, address, near popular 
landmarks location, rent amount per hours/month/
night, amenities, sample images, and reservation details 
was encoded in the system. Moreover, the system was 
for commercialization purposes that uses Business-
to-Consumer (B2C) model in able to provide direct 
reservation from a rental property to many potential 
online consumers (Turban et al., 2017).
Objectives of  the Study
Generally, the study aimed to design and develop an 
interactive web-based rental house smart finder. 
Specifically, the study aimed to:
1. Locate rental houses around Bongabong and Bansud. 
2. Provide detailed information of  the rental houses 
including the amenities, images, location, near popular 
landmarks, rental house type, prices, house rules and 
descriptions.
3. Accept reservation request from the clients through 
the system. 
4. Test and evaluate the system using ISO/IEC 25010 
software quality standard.
Figure 1: Rapid Application Development (RAD)
(Biemba & Nyirenda, 2019)
METHOD
Analysis and Quick Design
The data needed in the system as well as the materials 
and budget to build Web-Based Rental House Smart 
Finder using Rapid Application Development basis for 
Evaluation of  ISO 205010 project including the rental 
house details, necessary features, google map API, and 
plugins has been analyzed. The proponents analyzed the 
data through survey and search for related literatures/
systems that can serve as a guide to develop the project. 
All the details gathered from Clients and Landlords has 
been gathered and summarized to proceed with quick 
design process. Moreover, the software tools used such 
as WordPress, Google Map API, and plugins has been 
prepared to proceed to the next phase.
The design of  the Web-Based Rental House Smart 
Finder using Rapid Application Development basis for 
Evaluation of  ISO 205010  is presented in Figure 2. 
The figure comprises three stages namely Input, Process 
and Web-Based Rental House Smart Finder using Rapid 
Application Development basis for Evaluation of  ISO 
205010  Output. 
Prototype Cycle
In the next phase, the prototype cycle has been 
performed. There are three cycles used to create a 
system, it includes building, demonstrating and refining 
the prototype. In building phase, it begins with coding 
process, applied the prepared plugins, and integrated 
Google Map API in the system. Then created some 
fields for the details specifically the rental house name, 
descriptions, amenities, price, images and other important 
data. The next phase in prototype cycle is demonstrating 
the developed system. The system has been deployed to 
the target respondents and the features and flow of  a 
website has been demonstrated. The landlords as well as 
the clients encountered some minor error and suggested 
some additional features and fields including addons, 
maximum number of  guests and popular landmarks to 
satisfy their needs in terms of  finding rental house. After 
that, suggestions of  the target users was used to refine 
the system.
Testing
The Software quality Standard used to test and evaluate 
the system is ISO/IEC 25010 standard. There are lots 
of  testing procedures, but Beta testing has been used 
to ensure that users can test the system’s functionality 
and gain suggestions. The evaluation of  the system has 
been started after testing the project website. Landlords/
Homeowners, clients, and IT practitioners analyzed and 
evaluated the system and even provide a positive feedback 
and suggestions/comments. After that, the suggestions 
from the three types of  respondents are summarized, and 
proceed to the application of  initial changes.
Implementation
The project presented to the clients after following the 
suggestions. The system was advertised through the use 
of  social media by creating a Facebook page and asked 
the clients and landlords to implement it to others. The 
follow up suggestions based on the evaluation has been 
successfully applied except of  having a mobile application 
of  the system.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The study Web-Based Rental House Smart Finder using 
Rapid Application Development basis for Evaluation of  
ISO 205010  is a project that provides a guide for clients 
to find rental houses easier and conveniently. The system 
is a useful tool for finding rental homes in the Bansud 
and Bongabong areas. Furthermore, the system employs 

=== PAGE 4 ===
Page 
4
https://journals.e-palli.com/home/index.php/ijm
. Int. J. Metaverse 1(1) 01-04, 2023
a rule-based algorithm to filter out the users’ preferences. 
Any web browser can access the project as well. The 
ISO 25010 software quality standards were applied in the 
evaluation to rate the functional suitability, performance 
efficiency, usability, reliability, security, portability and 
maintainability of  the system. The system simplifies 
the process of  looking for a rental home. It also lessens 
the time consumed in finding rental houses within the 
areas and quickly access the information needed to rent a 
rental home. In evaluating the system, evaluation sheets 
were distributed to fifty (50) evaluators, ten (10) I.T 
practitioners, ten (10) landlords/home owners, and thirty 
(30) clients who used the system.  
All the suggestions and recommendations in the 
evaluation form were gathered and used to refine the 
system. Based on the conducted evaluation, the Web-
Based Rental House Smart Finder using Rapid Application 
Development basis for Evaluation of  ISO 205010  
project is functional, usable, secured, and maintainable 
for the respondents. The evaluation result in all criteria 
of  ISO/IEC 25010 with the overall mean of  3.67 and 
has been interpreted as very effective. As result of  the 
development of  the system, the developers found out 
that the evaluation according to the system performance 
is very effective and the evaluators were satisfied. In the 
future, the system must be used as basis of  the study and 
must be improve in terms of  locating rental houses. 
Table 1: Summary of  Evaluation Results in ISO/IEC 
25010
Criteria Mean Rank Verbal 
Interpretation
Functional 
Suitability 
3.70 2.5 Very Effective
Performance 
Efficiency 
3.59 7 Very Effective
Usability 3.65 5.5 Very Effective
Reliability 3.65 5.5 Very Effective
Security 3.70 2.5 Very Effective
Maintainability 3.71 1 Very Effective
Portability 3.67 4 Very Effective
Overall Mean 3.67 Very Effective
CONCLUSION
Based on the summary of  findings and objectives of  the 
report the following conclusions were drawn.
1. This system locates rental houses around Bongabong 
and Bansud using the filtering categories provided by the 
system.
2. This system provides important data of  a rental house 
including amenities, rental house name, location through 
google map, images, pricing categories, descriptions, near 
popular landmark, house rules, and type of  rental house.
3. This system accepts reservation from the clients by 
adding fields for reservation details. 
4. The system is usable, functional, secured, reliable, 
portable, maintainable, and efficient to use since it 
satisfies the evaluators of  the system
RECOMMENDATION
Based on the Conclusions, the Following 
Recommendations Were Drawn
1. This project should be recommended to the 
clients and homeowners/landlords around Bansud and 
Bongabong to simplify finding and locating rental houses 
for clients as well as promoting the rental homes of  the 
homeowners/landlords; 
2. This project must be used also by the parents to keep 
a track on the location of  the specific rental house of  
their son/daughter; 
3. This project must be used by the homeowners/
landlords to promote their rental houses in order to 
attract clients.
4. The future researchers must conduct the same study 
and should add cashless payments like GCash, since the 
system only accepts Cash on Meet Up payment only. 
5. The future researchers must create a mobile 
application for the system.
REFERENCES
Acs, Z. J., Estrin, S., Mickiewicz, T. & Szerb, L. (2018). 
Entrepreneurship, institutional economics, and 
economic growth: an ecosystem perspective. Small 
Bus Econ., 51,  501-514. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11187-018-0013-9
Curaza N., (2021). Boarding House Finder Thesis. 
Retrieved from https://itsourcecode.com/ 
Payusan, GM. B, Maderazo, C. V . & Ceniza, A. M. (2016). 
A Decision Support System in Facilitating properties 
for Rent using analytic Hierarchy Process and Goal 
programming. Far East and Journal of  Electronics and 
Communications., 2, 1-8. https://dx.doi.org/10.17654/
ECSV216001
Ramos A. A., Matienzo K. C., Casunuran M.D., Nervida 
C.M. & Jose M.S. (2018). E-vision: A Campus 
Locator Map Mobile Application using A*Algorithm. 
International Journal of  Computer Science and Software 
Engineering, 7(1), 6-11.
Santos, G. (2018). Sustainability and Shared Mobility 
Models. Sustainability., 10 (9), 3194. htpps://doi.
org/10.3390/su10093194
Turban, E., Whiteside, J., King, D. & Outland, J. (2017). 
Introduction to Electronic Commerce and Social 
Commerce. Springer International Publishing AG. 
htpps://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-50091-1